Add IPLD Gateway Specs (#293)
ipfs/specs: http-gateways/IPLD_GATEWAY.md

# IPLD Gateway Specification

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

![wip](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-orange.svg?style=flat-square)

```

**Authors**:

- Mauve Signweaver ([@RangerMauve](https://github.com/RangerMauve))

----

**Abstract**

IPLD Gateway is an extension of [PATH_GATEWAY.md](./PATH_GATEWAY.md) that enables lower level interaction with IPLD data structures under a specific path.

This document describes the delta between [PATH_GATEWAY.md](./PATH_GATEWAY.md) and this gateway type.

Summary:

- Adds a new `/ipld/{cid}[/{segments}][?{params}]` subpath to the gateway
- Defines a specification for parsing out extra parameters for individual path segments.
- Describes how to map to and from `ipld://` URLs

## HTTP API

### `GET /ipld/{cid}[/{segments}][?{params}]`

Resolve IPLD paths to some data.

The path segments will be traversed with any parameters used to transform data along the way.

The `format` query string parameter, or the `Accept` request header can be used to control the format which will be used to return the data.

> By default, data will be returned as `dag-json`

Reviewer: first time we mention dag-json, good to link to specs and make it clear implementations need to support both  text and binary.

```suggestion
By default, data will be returned as [DAG-JSON](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-json/).  Implementations MUST also support [DAG-CBOR](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/) as an opt-in (requested by the client).
```

<!--
TODO: Cache control semantics?
TODO: Add more details on how the traversal works?
-->

### `HEAD /ipld/{cid}[/{segments}][?{params}]`

Resolves IPLD paths, and yields the same status code and headers as `GET`.

### `POST /ipld/` and `POST /ipld/localhost/`

Upload raw data to IPLD.
The `body` of the request shall be parsed according to the `Content-Type` as IPLD data via standard encodings.
`/localhost/` is used to support `POST ipld://localhost/` for uploading IPLD data to local nodes in web browsers that support it.

> The response will contain an `ipld://{cid}/` URL pointing at your data.

Reviewer: Spec should remove any ambiguity:
- Contain it where? (A) plain text in response  body?  B) a `Location` header? 
- What will be content-type of the response? `text/plain` ?

Author: This is something I'd like to clarify with @fabricedesre since we had a bit of a disagreement.

Right now the precendent within Kubo and Agregore's protocol handlers is that there will be a 201 response with a `Location` header containing the URL as well as an empty body.

Fabrice was into having a 200 response and the URL inside the response body, which is something I was originally doing in Agregore, but switch when we started extending the writable gateway functionality in Kubo.

Ideally we should settle on the best course of action here during Lisbon. 😅

Author: Ideally, I'd like to use this to inform all the other protocol handlers too.

<!--

> TODO: Only allow `/localhost/`? Get rid of `/localhost` from the spec if light clients with protocol handlers don't matter/

Reviewer: Do we have use cases where things other than `localhost` could be used in the future? 
e.g. do we want to support POST to IPNS identifier?

Author: I've been using `POST` to `ipfs://localhost`, or a `PUT ipfs://cid/` as well as `POST ipns://key` to update CIDs, or `PUT ipns://key` in the [Agregore IPFS Daemon Spec](https://github.com/AgregoreWeb/agregore-ipfs-daemon/blob/main/spec.md)

-->

### `PATCH /ipld/{cid}[/{segments}][?{params}]`

> This endpoint enables you to apply a [patch set](https://ipld.io/specs/patch/) to existing IPLD data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This endpoint enables you to apply an [IPLD Patch](https://ipld.io/specs/patch/) to existing IPLD data.
```

<!--
TODO: Talk about content encoding
TODO: Mention interaction with ADLs/Schemeas/Selectors
-->

The response will be an `ipld://` URL with your updated data.

Note that the CID in the response URL will contain the same `segments` as in the request URL.
e.g. if you patch data at `ipld://{cid1}/some/path/`, you will get back a URL that looks like `ipld://{updated cid}/some/path/`
This enables you to make complex changes to a subtree in a dataset and get back a new root CID to use in your application.

## HTTP Request

### Request Headers

#### `Accept` (request header)

For `/ipld/{cid}/*` paths, the `Accept` header is used to indicate the encoding that should be used to return the data.
This means that data initially encoded as `dag-json` will be transcoded to `dag-cbor` if the `application/vnd.ipld.dag-cbor` Accept header is used.

> - `application/json`: Interpret in the same way as `application/vnd.ipld.dag-json`.

Reviewer: What if data is a valid JSON (and not DAG-JSON) added to ipfs with `json` codec (and not `dag-json`)?
Parsing it as dag-json will error, even tho it is a valid JSON.

@hacdias  and I discussed this edge case and ended up with requirement to check codec from CID, and if it is `json`, use generic JSON codec instead of `dag-json`.

Author: Interesting. Do you have text written up somewhere that I can copy paste here?

Reviewer 2: @RangerMauve we have some wording here, but it may not be definitive:

https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/67fab21f17def74cfc1a596024d21e823df7acfa/http-gateways/PATH_GATEWAY.md?plain=1#L184-L187

- `application/vnd.ipld.dag-json`: Return the block specified by the path encoded in `dag-json`.
- `application/vnd.ipld.dag-cbor`: Return the block specified by the path ecnoded in `dag-cbor`.

If no `Accept` header is present in the request, it will be assumed to be `application/vnd.ipld.dag-json`.

#### `Content-Type` (request header)

This header applies to `PUT/POST/PATCH` requests for `/ipld/*` paths on IPLD gateways which also support the [writable gateways spec](./WRITABLE_GATEWAY.md).
Including it will hint to the writable IPLD gateway which encoding to use to parse the request body into the IPLD Data Model.

- `application/json`: Interpret in the same way as `application/vnd.ipld.dag-json`.

> - `application/vnd.ipld.dag-json`: Return the block specified by the path encoded in `dag-json`.

Reviewer: TODO: link to IANA when https://github.com/ipfs/in-web-browsers/issues/202 is resolved

> - `application/vnd.ipld.dag-cbor`: Return the block specified by the path ecnoded in `dag-cbor`.

Reviewer: TODO: link to IANA when https://github.com/ipfs/in-web-browsers/issues/201 is resolved

### Request Query Parameters

#### `format` (request query parameter)

Optional, `format=<format>` can be used to request specific encodings.

This is a URL-friendly alternative to sending `Accept: application/vnd.ipld.<format>` header, see [Accept](#accept-request-header) for more details.

### Path Segments and Path Segment Parameters

Path segments are used for IPLD data model [traversal](https://ipld.io/docs/data-model/traversal/).
Each segment is separated by a `/` and contains a utf8 `name` followed by an optional set of parameters using the [Matrix URI format](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/MatrixURIs.html).

Example:

```
/ipld/bafywhatever/foo/bar;extra=thing;whatever=here/
```

Path segments can have additional parameters added to them by separating them using semicolons (`;`) and having key-value pairs separated by an `=`.

> This format is based on the [Matrix URI proposal from the w3c](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/MatrixURIs.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This format is based on the [Matrix URI proposal from the W3C](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/MatrixURIs.html).
```

Note that these parameters are stripped from the segment name when passed to any underlying traversal code.

> This spec only perscribes two reserved parameter names: `ADL` for specifying [Advanced Data Layouts](https://ipld.io/docs/advanced-data-layouts/) to process the data with, and `schema` to specify an [IPLD schema](https://ipld.io/docs/schemas/intro/) to use to interpret the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This spec only perscribes two reserved parameter names: `adl` for specifying [Advanced Data Layouts](https://ipld.io/docs/advanced-data-layouts/) to process the data with, and `schema` to specify an [IPLD schema](https://ipld.io/docs/schemas/intro/) to use to interpret the data.
```

Other names may be specified in future specs that build upon this one.

#### ADL (segment parameter)

Segments may contain an `adl` key which points to a name of an [Advanced Data Layout](https://ipld.io/docs/advanced-data-layouts/intro/) to process the node with.

> The supported ADL names will vary based on gateway.

Reviewer: Is there an implicit default `adl` or is it empty/missing

Author: Empty by default since just raw data would be loaded.

An example value would be `;adl=hamt` to specify the [HAMT](https://ipld.io/specs/advanced-data-layouts/hamt/) ADL that's used to represent large maps.

> For example `/ipld/bafyreic672jz6huur4c2yekd3uycswe2xfqhjlmtmm5dorb6yoytgflova;adl=hamt/yes` (taken from the HAMT examples), should resolve to the following:

Reviewer: Why `hamt/yes` and not `hamt` ?

Author: The `yes` is another path segment in the URL. This shows how the ADL can be used at an arbitrary point in the traversal and not just at the start or end.

Should I add wording to explain that?

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```json
````

[
  {
    "line": 9,
    "column": 501
  }
]
```

#### Schema (segment parameter)

Segments may contain a `schema` key which points to the `CID` of an [IPLD Schema](https://ipld.io/docs/schemas/) in its [DMT](https://ipld.io/specs/schemas/#dsl-vs-dmt) form.
If a `schema` key is provided, there must also be a `type` parameter which references one of the named Types within the IPLD Schema.

The node at that point in the traversal will then be transformed by the schema, and any typed nodes it links to will also be transformed by their respective schemas.

For example, given the following schema (note it is written in DSL form, but must be converted to the DMT in order to be refernced):

```ipldschema

> type Example struct {

Reviewer: nit: I've read this section and tbh have no idea what is the value to end user – CBOR traversal and field resolution with extra steps so the output looks a certain way? 

In ADL section we have good use case "ADL that's used to represent large maps" – we need similar real world example for schemas.

What would a schema be useful for irl?  I feel the spec here needs better `Example`, so the value is obvious.

Author: @rvagg @warpfork would you be able to comment on real world uses of IPLD Schema that would be relevant here?

Author: One use case for schemas is to use the `representation` functionality to render data in more human/application readable formats from formats that are more size efficient.

e.g. some things might be using a `listpairs` representation which would look like an array of arrays by default. But with a schema you can transform the representation to be more human readable.

I'm gonna be doing stuff along this line for the Prolly Tree work where we'll be encoding tree nodes more efficiently, but having a way to put them through a schema before the application code starts working with them.

  Hello String
  Goodbye &NestedExample
} representation tuple

type NestedExample struct {
  region String
} representation tuple
```

> The CID for the DMT of this schema is `bafyreibvheoym4avfsjfw63yhsymovm7o54ftcnxwxovqf5xxcbjddanze`

Reviewer: nit: was unable to inspec this via `ipfs dag get --output-codec=dag-json bafyreibvheoym4avfsjfw63yhsymovm7o54ftcnxwxovqf5xxcbjddanze  | jq`

As a rule of thumb, CIDs used in IPIP should be publicly available and pinned (e.g. to https://estuary.tech and https://web3.storage, do not use Pinata as afaik  it does not announce CIDs on DHT).

We will have automation for this, btu for now it is up to IPIP author to handle.

Author: Should I maybe include some CBOR files with the fixtures that are relevant to the spec?

```json
['Hello', {'/': 'bafyreia5mssvef4owvyols2bduwxl6csvlb35oigyj4gc7wm6wzg44udtq'}]
```

We can construct the path `/ipld/bafyreifuyjaq3u3izc7qaf4shh76lk6565e72njgjxtava7q4s7bxheyxa/Goodbye?schema=bafyreibvheoym4avfsjfw63yhsymovm7o54ftcnxwxovqf5xxcbjddanze&type=Example`, or more succinctly `ipld://${cid2}/Goodbye?schema=${schemaCID}&type=Example`.

The resolved node should look like:

```JSON
{
	"region": "Cyberspace"
}
```

#### Escaping / Encoding

IPLD path segments and path segment keys/values may use [escape sequences that follow RFC1738](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1738) to represent raw values like `/` which would otherwise be interpreted by URL parsers as being structurally significant.

Specifically, any values in path segments that are part of the "reserved" list of characters `";" | "/" | "?" | ":" | "@" | "&" | "="`, or are non-ascii characters, must be escaped when encoding to the path.

For example, path segment name `escape;this` should be escaped to `escape%3Bthis` so that `this` doesn't get accidentally parsed as a parameter.

Similarly, the path segment name `😁` should be escaped to `%F0%9F%98%81`.

## Interaction with URLs

> `/ipld/` HTTP paths map directly to `ipld://` URLs.

Reviewer: I suggest we cover the entire URI family, so this spec is bit more future-proof:

```suggestion
`/ipld/` HTTP paths map directly to `urn:ipld:` URNs,  `ipld:` URIs or `ipld://` pseudo-URLs.
```
